# INTRODUCTION

High throughput sequencing technologies are standard techniques in biomedical research and personalized medicine. Identification of genetic variations and their association with characterized phenotypes facilitates assessment of the risk of genetic-driven disorders and developement of treatments and cures [PMID: 19474294; PMID: 19584936; PMID: 18460330; PMID: 22908194; PMID: 21199653].

The most common type of DNA sequence variations found in the genome are single nucleotide polymorphism SNPs[PMID: 14685227; A global reference for human genetic variation Nature 526, 68–74 (01 October 2015)].
Mutations associated with cancer are often found to be at low frequency (defined in the literature as low allele frequency) [PMID: 29123093; PMID: 29178133; PMID: 23415222; PMID: 21160474]. Previous work have reported mutations, found at low frequencies, that where the results of systematic errors during DNA storage and library preparation, such as "oxo-G" and "cytosine deamination", rather than true variants [PMID: 23303777; PMID: 28209900].

Chen and co-authors showed that damage can not be neglected as it leads to wrong variant calling at low allele frequencies, which are often associated with desease.

Most cancer tumor samples available for research are formalin-fixed-parafin-embedded (FFPE) prior to storage. FFPE treatment is associated with DNA damge and concomitant mutations at low allele frequencies. Ancient DNA [PMID: 20028723] or ultrasonic shearing of the DNA [PMID: 23303777] have been also associated with systematic mutations of the DNA. Such data is usually scarce, leading to low sequencing coverage and subsequently to low statistical power to accept or reject low allele fraction variants.

Deamination is normally a signature of FFPE treated samples[PMID: 31477010]. A previous work found no evidence of immediate deamination of DNA upon FFPE treatment (allele frequencies <2%) compared to the fresh frozen matched tissue [PMID: 29698444]. However, the mentioned study is restricted to the FFPE process itself and did not evaluate the impact of storage in such samples. In practice, we observe systematic artifact associated with FFPE treatment and storage. 

Experimental protocols to assess the level of damage of DNA (most commonly associated to FFPE treatment but potentially usefull for other cases) have been developed in the past [PMID: 16333309, kappa kit?]. The samples can be classified into good and down to very-poor quality.

Bioinformatic assessment of the damage of a sequenced DNA sample can be used to compute an analytical threshold for acceptance or rejection of low allele fraction variants, leading to higher sensitity and specificity improving asertivity in associations with phenotype, making a diagnosis or planning a treatment.

In a pioneering study, Costello and co-workers developed a Phred-like score, termed ArtQ, to evaluate the difference on counts of a mutation in its forward or reverse complement forms. Such score, though usefull to classify the DNA sample in a particular quiality bin, might not be extensible to influence downstream analysis, such as variant calling.

Another similar score, developed by Chen and co-workers, computes the degree of imbalance between variants detected in read1 and read2 in paired-read sequencing [Chen at al.]. This score, termed Global Imbalance Value (GIV) is an alternative to ArtQ and is usefull within the same restrictions as the ArtQ.

Tools available for detection of artifacts in ngs data do not incorporate positional bias along the read [Costello et al.], discard half of the data [Chen et al.] or have not been optimized for speed of execution or disk space.

Here, we report a new tool for the analysis of artifacts in ngs data and we outline empirically derived cryteria to include such analysis into different pipelines. We offer 


Moreover, in the science study, repetitive regions were not included in the analysis, leaving aside up to 80% of high quality (Qread>XX and Qmap>XX) data in FFPE samples. 

In order to provide a robust and efficient tool to analyze and assess damage from DNA alignemnt data we developed tasmanian... We keep readability as a major component in this tool and any bioinformatician can alter the code without having to spend excesive ammounts of time.



Results:

How Tasmanian compares to other tools in the analysis of NGS missmatches? Picard collectSequencingArtifactMetrics [pmid:...] does not consider the positional information of the missmatches. It provides summarized tables containing error rates and phred-scale quality scores for each type of missmatches. Damage estimator [pmid...] wraps samtools mpileup [pmid:...] and provides detailed information about the position of the missmatch within each of the reads in paired end sequencing data. Nevertheless, second strand is not included in the analysis, leaving aside half of the available data. MPileup is a very powerfull tool for producing binnary VCF files containing all genomic positions. This information is produced at the expense of very intensive computation but is necessary to call variants. However, such information includes irrelevant details for assessment of randomly distributed, systematic errors. Hence, the time consumed by mpileup alone is not justified in this case. 

Tasmanian tool compares the aligned data to the reference genome and counts each of the 12 substitution and 4 matches at every position along each of the reads in a paired end setting. As the data should be randomly distributed, the frequency of substitutions/matches should be proportional to the counts. Nevertheless, different experiments could lead to different systematic biases and the user can also compute the frequencies, normalized by the reference base at the indicated position. 
Often times, the analysis of mismatches is restricted to genomic positions such as non-repetitive regions. Other times different regions could contain different types of missmatches, depending on sample preparation (e.g. target capturing different regions in different samples). While tools like bedtools [pmid:...] can split reads provided a file containing the regions of interest, such information is not sufficient to identify the position of a missmatch in the read. To solve that issue, tasmanian provides am optimized routine to include such information in the analysis, provided a file with the genomic positions of interests. 
When a read overlaps with a defined genomic location, tasmanian can split the read and mask the intersecting and the complementary bases into different subreads, keeping the information about the position of such bases in the read. This procedure is done "on the fly" with an insignificant addition of time and computation power. 
The user can also execute the analysis in a debugging mode, which will allow to serialize two complementary masked bam files. 

We analize FFPE data that undergo repair with [...] and without repair. We found that while repair has a profound impact in regions with unique sequences, it did not repetitive regions did not sho 




Discussion:

Analysis of missmatches usually preceedes calling variants. It can be used as a first screen to decide if the sample is suitable to further variant calling analysis or it can be used as a cryteria to assign a qualitative measure to potential variants associated with desease. 
While the extent of systematic missmatches due to artifacts associated to DNA manipulation have very low frequency, it has a big impact in variant calling where frequencies are as low or even lower than potential systematic evaluated artifacts. Hence, half of the data discarded by damage estimator will have a profound impact in further assesment of variant calling results.  <!-- ANALYZE DATA WITH  DIFFERENT AMOUNTS OF READS AND ASSESS THE IMPACT IN THE RESULTS -->
